Once around giant elliptical
galaxies. So galaxies come in a lot of
different sizes and shapes. The main two
are spiral galaxies and ellipticals. We
have irregular galaxies, lenticular
galaxies, dwarf galaxies and so on, but
the main two classes are spirals and
ellipticals. And it's the ellipticals
that we're really interested in at this
stage.
Perhaps the most famous is Messier
object 87, a giant elliptical galaxy.
It's just over 50 million lighty years
away lying in the constellation of
Virgo. And it's the central focus of the
Virgo cluster of galaxies. You can see a
number of other smaller galaxies in the
image around
it. These are going to merge with it at
some point. And its diameter is about
12,000 light years, which is only um 20%
larger than the diameter of our Milky
Way, which is a spiral. But the Milky
Way is very much a flat disc, only a few
tens of light years thick. Whereas M87
as an elliptical is elliptical in all
three dimensions. It's a uh American
football or rugby ballshaped city of
stars all orbiting round in every
possible
plane. And so the volume of it is 200
times greater. And there are 200 times
the total mass of stars held within M87.
So it's much much more massive than a
spiral galaxy like the Milky Way. It
also has a particle beam emerging from
it, a jet. And there's probably another
one behind the image that we can't see.
You can see the blue jet in the top
image
there. This is high energy radiation
being shot out from the central region
where there is an accretion disc of
matter spiraling to its doom into the
enormous black hole in the center. And
as it does so, it gets very hot and
highly electrically charged from
friction stripping electrons. And the
result of all that charged material
whirling in a
circle spiraling in towards the black
hole is a very twisted magnetic field
which winds itself up into a columnated
beam and hurls material out at a good
fraction of the speed of light. And
that's what we're seeing there. and the
radiation coming from it as the uh
particles are colliding with the
intergalactic medium. These are many
hundreds of thousands of light years
long, these
beams. There's another image of the jet
at the top there and an artist's
impression of what's going on at the
bottom. It's all down to the enormous
rotational energy and the power of
gravity of the 3 billion solar mass
black hole in the center of N87. That's
a thousand times the mass of Sagittarius
A star, the super massive black hole in
the middle of our own galaxy. So, a real
monster. So, what about these elliptical
galaxies versus spiral galaxies? What's
the difference? Well, color for a start.
Elliptical galaxies are basically
yellow, yellowy, white in color all over
and largely featureless. Whereas the
spiral galaxies have the spiral arms.
They have the central region and the
central region is colored similarly to
the um ellipticals. They are yellowy
white and the arms are blue tinged with
the dark lines of veins of dirt and dust
running through them. So two differences
really, the color layout and the the
dust. The color is all down to the
temperature of the stars which is
controlled by their mass. So big massive
stars are hot and burn very rapidly
and big stars in astronomy live fast and
die young. And this chart which I've
made here shows time going horizontally
in steps of factors of 10. So each
column is 10 times the previous one.
Whereas up the side we have the mass,
the temperature or burn
rate giving us the ranks of different
colored stars. So the faint red dwarfs
are at the bottom and the blue super
giant stars are at the top. And the
super giant stars, the blue ones, they
live a very short life for a million
years or so. And then at the 10 million
year column, they are burnt out.
The blue white ones 10 times longer. The
yellow white ones live 10 times longer
again. So up to um we're getting up to
the 100
million year lifetime. Yellowy white
ones a billion years. Yellow ones 10
billion. Orange
ones 100 billion and a trillion years or
so for the red dwarfs. Now, at the end
of the orange and red dwarf, we haven't
shown a nebula as a result of the death
of those stars because no orange or red
dwarf has ever had time in the history
of the universe to run out of fuel yet.
Only the larger stars live short enough
lives that they're shorter than the age
of the universe so far. I mean, the
orange and red ones probably will run
out and probably will shed their outer
layers as a small planetary nebula at
some point, but we've never been able to
see it because the universe is just not
old
enough. So, the point really is that the
older the group of stars you're looking
at, the fewer of the massive stars it's
going to contain. If it's 10 million
years old, it really can't contain any
of the super massive blue stars. They
will have burned out by that stage. And
the older it is, the more the massive
ones will have disappeared. So when we
look at a spiral galaxy, we are
immediately able to tell that in the
central region where there are
only the white, yellow, orange, and red
stars present, there are no blue ones.
giving that central
color that must not be forming new stars
anymore. Whereas in the outer spiral
arms, new stars are being made and new
stars can include the super massive blue
ones. And of course, they're very bright
and they dominate the color. So in the
spiral arms you have all sorts of stars
being made but the light output is
largely down to the brightest ones and
those are the blue super giants and the
bluey white
ones. And so those regions contain newly
formed giant stars whereas the central
region does not and only contains the
remaining much older stars. So this
evolution is going on here and the uh
aging of the nucleus will gradually
spread as material to make new stars is
consumed from the center towards the
outer regions. And you can see the dirt
and dust lanes there. Those are the
regions where we're going to form new
stars next.
And this is a picture of the Orion
Nebula that I took with a 10-in
reflector about 20 years ago, showing a
star forming region in our galaxy, where
new stars have been born in this cloud
of gas and dust that collapsed a few
million years ago. And they're now
bursting into life and lighting up the
remains of the gas and dust, giving that
pink tinge where there's lots of
hydrogen. And we see those pink patches
all through the spiral arms of the
spiral galaxies indicating new star
formation going on. But we do not see it
in ellipticals. In elliptical galaxies,
star formation is over. And it's been
over some time. and the blue and blue
white stars. And indeed, most of the
white ones have now burned out, leaving
just the long lived yellowy white,
white, sorry, yellowy white, yellow,
orange, and red stars. And so, no new
stars being made in these. These are old
dying galaxies.
They have no more gas and dust. Although
in this image, there's a few bits of gas
and dust visible in the outer reaches of
this particular elliptical galaxy.
Whereas, if you compare it with the
spiral galaxy at the top, which is seen
slightly edge onto us, there's a lot
more gas and dust there. And so all the
matter in the elliptical is now trapped
in the longived stars and will remain so
until the very distant future when they
burn out or is now in the stellar
remnants of the larger stars, the white
dwarfs, the neutron stars or the black
holes or indeed quite a lot of planets
probably as well. But it's not available
to make new stars. And so, how do we get
this dichotomy, these two different
types of galaxies? What's going on?
Well, we think it's all down to mergers.
Here's a pair of spiral galaxies showing
that classic structure with the uh old
nucleus and the new star formation in
the spiral arms, but they're in the
process of colliding with each other and
merging. And we see this a lot, but we
can't sit and watch it because it takes
far too long, way beyond a human
lifetime. And
so we can only see lots of different
examples in process and try and organize
them into a logical sequence. Here's
another case where a merger has gone a
little bit further. You can see the
central parts of the two galaxies and
the tidal tails where the whiplash
effect of gravity has hurled lots of new
stars further out away from the
galaxies. And again, the blue color
indicating that it's also triggered new
star
formation. And this is a really good
example, the antenna galaxy. The pair of
galaxies have come together and are in
the process of finally merging. And
there is a awful lot of new star
formation going on as a result of all
the turbulence and the shock waves
compressing the gas. You can see all
that pink of hydrogen and all the dirty
dusty material. And again, the enormous
tidal tails of ejected stars that was
whiplashed away as part of the
collision. And we've got a simulation
here which I shall attempt to get to
play for you. So there's two spiral
galaxies and they're at different
orientations and they're coming towards
each other and as they approach gravity
takes hold and they form together and
you will see some of the shapes
indicated in those earlier real pictures
turn up as part of the simulation. Um,
as the simulation replicates reality at
various different stages, you can see
the tidal tails forming here and the two
galaxies spinning around, coming back
together again. Gravity's got hold of
them and bringing them back
in. You can see the millions of stars
going every which way around them there.
The two nuclei pass into each other and
finally merge. There's a huge burst of
material ejected. U great blobs of its
tidal tails. But what we've ended up
with is fundamentally one merged galaxy
in the center containing a lot of
uh stars packed tightly together into a
rugby ball shape, an ellipsoid. and the
material is now falling back onto it
from all around where it was hurled away
during the collision and we're building
an elliptical galaxy. So, we started
with two spirals and we're gradually
forming an elliptical. And of course,
there's no reason why this can't then
merge with yet more spiral galaxies and
gradually get bigger and bigger as time
goes on. And so we can put all of that
into a timeline with the big bang at the
beginning, small galaxies forming to
start with. We don't quite understand
that process yet, but they gradually get
bigger and you get a lot of starburst
galaxies and quazars where the black
hole in the center is feeding rapidly
and a huge amount of activity forms. Um
and then you end up uh with that
stabilizing as a g compact galaxy which
can then merge together these spiral
galaxies merging into each other and
forming a giant elliptical at the end
stage um where you have all the matter
locked up in these very long lived
structures. And unless there's some
great merger in the future with some
other structure, you really won't see
very much change going forward until
gradually the stars just burn out and uh
dissipate themselves in the immense
distant uh
times. So, thanks very much for
listening. That was once around the
giant elliptical galaxies. I hope you've
enjoyed that one and I hope you get
chance to look at some of the other
videos in the catalog as well. But for
now, I'll sign off. Thanks a lot.